1. Title
  Hi, I'm Nicolas. Thank you for having me. I'll be discussing my project, Clustergrammer, a web-based visualization and analysis tool for high-dimensional biological data.

  This presentation can be found at this bitly link - bitly/clust-blitz if you are interested in following along. I'll leave this link up for the first few slides.

2. Biology is Overflowing with Data
  Biology is overflowing with data. Using high-throughput techniques, it is possible to measure the expression of tens of thousands of genes, the levels of thousands of proteins, and dozens of proteins in hundreds of thousands of single cells.

3. Biological Data is Difficult to Visualize
  However, biological data can be very high dimensional, which makes it difficult to visualize.

  This can lead to hairballs.

4. Heatmap/Clustergram Visualizations (Part 1)
  Heatmaps are a popular visualization technique that enable direct visualization of high-dimensional data. Unlike dimensionality reduction methods, there is no loss of interpretability with a heatmap.

  In a heatmap data-points are shown as columns and dimensions are shown as rows. In this example, the data-points are patients and the dimensions are genes.

5. Heatmap/Clustergram Visualizations (Part 2)
  However, static images are limited in the amount of information they can visualize - increasing the amount of information in a heatmap can lead to unreadable labels.

  And it is currently difficult to share interactive heatmaps. The person you are sharing with needs to have the same software you have and know how to use it.

6.1 Clustergrammer Web App
  We built Clustergrammer to address these problems.

  Clustergrammer allows users to easily generate interactive and shareable heatmaps. It enables user friendly data exploration, and its free and open source.

6.2 Clustergrammer Web App
  The Clustergrammer web app allows users to upload a matrix and instantly generate an interactive and shareable clustergram.

  The resultant heatmap is highly interactive and allows: zooming, reordering, filtering, etc.

7. Lung Cancer Post-translational Modification Signaling
  Our collaborators at Cell Signaling Technology measured phosphorylation levels in 42 lung cancer cell lines and we are using Clustergrammer to analyze their data.

  Here is an example visualization of cell lines clustered based on phosphorylation. We can see that cell lines cluster according to their histology, but not gender. We can also see that several clusters of phosphorylations form and can be associated with different sets of cell lines.

8. Lung Cancer Gene Expression
  Corresponding gene expression data for these cell lines was also obtained from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia.

  From this data we can see that cell lines also cluster accodring to their histology and we can identify clusters of differentially regulated genes.

  [If Enrichr categories are working reliably - Clustergrammer can also be used to help us understand the function of these genes using enrichment analysis.]

9. Conclusions
  Clustergrammer can visualize a wide variety of biological data

  It has been integrated into several Ma'ayan lab web apps including: Enrichr and Gen3va.

  Clustergrammer is also available as an IPython/Jupyter Notebook Widget for local use.

10. Acknowledgments and links
  I would like to acknowledge the Ma'ayan lab and our collaborators at Cell Signaling Technology as well as our funding sources.

  Links to these slides and the project are available here.


CST notes:
  Our collaborators at Cell Signaling Technology Inc. used SILAC phosphoproteomics to measure differential phosphorylation in a panel of 42 lung cancer cell lines compared to non-cancerous lung cells.

  We are collaborating with Cell Signaling Technologies, who in addition to producing antibodies also conduct independent resaerch. We are helping them analyze a very unique dataset from a panel of 32 lung cancer cell lines. They have used SILAC mass spectrometry to measure phosphorylation, methylation, and acetylation. This dataset offers a very unique view of the mechanisms involved in lung cancer and offers a unique set of challenges in analyzing - there is a great deal of missing data for instance. (mention that they are measuring differential modification from these cell lines compared to non-cancerous lung tissue).

  Here is a heatmap view of phosphorylation that shows several clusters of lung cell lines as well as their defining differential phosphorylation.

-----
links
twitter: https://twitter.com/vanallenlab
https://twitter.com/drob/status/768484539052228608

http://kittentoob.com/cat-news/the-daily-strut-the-411-on-hairballs-and-ear-mite-tips-cat-friendships-zazzle-to-dazzle-cat-artistry-and-helping-cats-in-need/

http://bmcbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1741-7007-8-40

R heatmap: http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/moac/people/students/peter_cock/r/heatmap/

MNIST: http://pavel.surmenok.com/2014/07/06/neural-networks-training-using-encog/